Hello World Precompile Tutorial (#1040)
ava-labs/avalanche-docs: docs/subnets/hello-world-precompile-tutorial.md

// contract.
type PrecompiledContract interface {
	RequiredGas(input []byte) uint64  // RequiredPrice calculates the contract gas use
	Run(input []byte) ([]byte, error) // Run runs the precompiled contract
}
```

Here is an example of the [sha256 precompile](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/master/core/vm/contracts.go#L238-L252) function.

```go
type sha256hash struct{}

// RequiredGas returns the gas required to execute the pre-compiled contract.
//
// This method does not require any overflow checking as the input size gas costs
// required for anything significant is so high it's impossible to pay for.
func (c *sha256hash) RequiredGas(input []byte) uint64 {
	return uint64(len(input)+31)/32*params.Sha256PerWordGas + params.Sha256BaseGas
}

func (c *sha256hash) Run(input []byte) ([]byte, error) {
	h := sha256.Sum256(input)
	return h[:], nil
}
```

The CALL opcode (CALL, STATICCALL, DELEGATECALL, and CALLCODE) allows us to invoke this precompile.

The function signature of CALL in the EVM is as follows:

```go
 Call(caller ContractRef,
 addr common.Address,
 input []byte,
 gas uint64,
 value *big.Int)
 (ret []byte, leftOverGas uint64, err error)
```

> Smart contracts in Solidity are compiled and converted into bytecode when they are first deployed. They are then stored on the blockchain and an address (usually known as the contract address) is assigned to it. When a user calls a function from a smart contract, it goes through the `CALL` function in the EVM. It takes in the caller address, the contract address, the input (function’s signature (truncated to the first leading four bytes) followed by the packed arguments data), gas, and value (native token). The function selector from the input lets the EVM know where to start from in the bytecode of the smart contract. It then executes a series of instructions (EVM opcodes) and returns the result.

Reviewer: Can we try to change this explanation a little bit? The way it currently reads it sounds like the EVM is explicitly doing a bunch of things that are actually taken care of by solidity.

Ex.
- a contract is not assigned an address, the address is calculated based off of the tx/opcode that creates it, the current version seems like a misnomer
- the EVM does not decide where to go based off of a function selector, Solidity calculates a function selector to figure out where in its own bytecode it needs to jump to in order to execute the correct function

Author: Sure.

When a precompile function is called, it still goes through the `CALL` function in the EVM. However, it works a little differently. The EVM checks if the address is a precompile address from the mapping list and if so redirects to the precompile function.

> ```go
>   if p := precompiles[addr]; p != nil {
>     return RunPrecompiledContract(p, input, contract)
>   }
> ```

Reviewer: Can we remove this example since this code is not actually present in the EVM? I think it would be better to keep this to a high-level explanation

```suggestion
```go
When a CALL  opcode is used, the EVM first checks if the address is a precompile address. If so, it executes the requested precompile. If not, it attempts to load a contract stored at that address.
```

Reviewer: We should simplify this whole section about how a precompile is executed, we can keep it higher level than it is now

Reviewer 2: @anusha-ctrl I cannot find what @aaronbuchwald suggested has been put into the doc. He suggested to add 

> When a CALL  opcode is used, the EVM first checks if the address is a precompile address. If so, it executes the requested precompile. If not, it attempts to load a contract stored at that address.

Author: Hi @yulin-dong, @aaronbuchwald and i worked on this section on a google meets together. thanks!

A stateful precompile follows this interface.

```go
// StatefulPrecompiledContract is the interface for executing a precompiled contract
type StatefulPrecompiledContract interface {
	// Run executes the precompiled contract.
	Run(accessibleState PrecompileAccessibleState,
	caller common.Address,
	addr  common.Address,
	input []byte,
	suppliedGas uint64,
	readOnly bool)
	(ret []byte, remainingGas uint64, err error)
}
```

Notice the most important difference between the stateful precompile and precompile interface. We now inject state access to the `Run` function. Precompiles only took in a single byte slice as input. However, stateful precompile functions have complete access to the Subnet-EVM state, and can be used to implement a much wider range of functionalities.

With state access, we can modify balances, read/write the storage of other contracts, and could even hook into external storage outside of the bounds of the EVM’s merkle trie (note: this would come with repercussions for state sync since part of the state would be moved off of the merkle trie). We can now write custom logic to make our own EVM.

### Assumption of Knowledge

> We assume that the user has knowledge of git, golang, and javascript. It is not necessary to have knowledge of the EVM, but it is extremely helpful. Here are some resources to get started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume that the user has knowledge of git, golang, and javascript. The user should also be deeply familiar with the EVM since adding a stateful precompile is effectively modifying the EVM and requires an understanding of its invariants to do so correctly.
```

- [The Ethereum Virtual Machine](https://github.com/ethereumbook/ethereumbook/blob/develop/13evm.asciidoc)
- [Precompiles in Solidity](https://medium.com/@rbkhmrcr/precompiles-solidity-e5d29bd428c4)
- [Deconstructing a Smart Contract](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/deconstructing-a-solidity-contract-part-i-introduction-832efd2d7737/)
- [Layout of State Variables in Storage](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_storage.html)
- [Layout in Memory](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_memory.html)
- [Layout of Call Data](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_calldata.html)
- [Contract ABI Specification](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/abi-spec.html)
- [Precompiles in Solidity](https://medium.com/@rbkhmrcr/precompiles-solidity-e5d29bd428c4)
- [Customizing the EVM with Stateful Precompiles](https://medium.com/avalancheavax/customizing-the-evm-with-stateful-precompiles-f44a34f39efd)

### The Process

> We will first create a Solidity interface that our precompile will implement. Then we will use the precompile tool to autogenerate functions and fill out the rest. We're not done yet! We will then have to update a few more places within the Subnet-EVM. Some of this work involves assigning a precompile address, adding the precompile to the list of Subnet-EVM precompiles, and finally enabling the precompile. Now we can see our functions in action as we write another solidity smart contract that interacts with our precompile. Lastly, we will write some tests to make sure everything works as promised. We will also have an [official tutorial](https://github.com/ava-labs/hello-world-official-precompile-tutorial) with step by step commits you can follow to double check your work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will first create a Solidity interface that our precompile will implement. Then we will use the PrecompileGen tool to autogenerate functions and fill out the rest. We're not done yet! We will then have to update a few more places within the Subnet-EVM. Some of this work involves assigning a precompile address, adding the precompile to the list of Subnet-EVM precompiles, and finally enabling the precompile. Now we can see our functions in action as we write another solidity smart contract that interacts with our precompile. Lastly, we will write some tests to make sure everything works as promised. We will also have an [official tutorial](https://github.com/ava-labs/hello-world-official-precompile-tutorial) with step by step commits you can follow to double check your work.
```

Author: fixed

### Prerequisites

- Install Go 1.18.1 or later. Follow the instructions [here](https://golang.org/doc/install). You can verify by running `go version`
- Clone the [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm) repo
- Clone [AvalancheGo](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego) repo
- Install [Avalanche Network Runner](https://docs.avax.network/subnets/network-runner)
- Install solc by following

  ```bash
  brew tap ethereum/ethereum
  brew install solidity
  ```

>   After this you should be able to run `solc` on your command console.

Reviewer: Can we link to the solc installation instructions instead of giving them here? This will not work for people that do not use `brew`

Author: fixed to use solcjs

## Tutorial

For the tutorial, we will be working in a new branch in [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm). There will be code snippets to copy and paste in the appropriate files.

> We will first start off by creating the Solidity interface that we want our precompile to implement. This will be the HelloWorld Interface. It will have two simple functions, `sayHello` and `setGreeting`. These two functions will demonstrate the getting and setting respectively of a value using state access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will first start off by creating the Solidity interface that we want our precompile to implement. This will be the HelloWorld Interface. It will have two simple functions, `sayHello` and `setGreeting`. These two functions will demonstrate the getting and setting respectively of a value stored in the precompile's state space.
```

Author: thanks

Reviewer 2: I will fix this change with my review.

> We will place the interface in `./contract-examples/contracts`. This interface should be named `IHelloWorld.sol`. You can copy and paste the below code into `IHelloWorld.sol`.

Reviewer: We need to make it clear what repo we are in at this point. There's no indication thus far that we are in `subnet-evm`

Author: thanks

	h := sha256.Sum256(input)
	return h[:], nil
}
```

The CALL opcode (CALL, STATICCALL, DELEGATECALL, and CALLCODE) allows us to invoke this precompile.

The function signature of CALL in the EVM is as follows:

```go
 Call(
 	caller ContractRef,
 	addr common.Address,
 	input []byte,
 	gas uint64,
 	value *big.Int,
)(ret []byte, leftOverGas uint64, err error)
```

Precompiles are a shortcut to execute a function implemented by the EVM itself, rather than an actual contract. A precompile is associated with a fixed address defined in the EVM. There is no byte code associated with that address.

When a precompile is called, the EVM checks if the input address is a precompile address and if so it executes the precompile. Otherwise it loads the smart contract at the input address and runs it on the the EVM intrepreter with the specified input data.

### Stateful Precompiled Contracts

A stateful precompile builds on a precompile in that it adds state access. Stateful precompiles are not available in the default EVM, and are specific to Avalanche EVMs such as [Coreth](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth) and [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm).

> A stateful precompile follows this [interface](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/precompile/contract.go#L64-L67).

Author: sure thanks

```go
// StatefulPrecompiledContract is the interface for executing a precompiled contract
type StatefulPrecompiledContract interface {
	// Run executes the precompiled contract.
	Run(accessibleState PrecompileAccessibleState,
	caller common.Address,
	addr  common.Address,
	input []byte,
	suppliedGas uint64,
	readOnly bool)
	(ret []byte, remainingGas uint64, err error)
}
```

A stateful precompile injects state access through the `PrecompileAccessibleState` interface to provide access to the EVM state including the ability to modify balances and read/write storage.

This way we can provide even more customization of the EVM through Stateful Precompiles than we can with the original precompile interface!

## Tutorial

### Overview

This is a brief overview of what this tutorial will cover.

> - Write a Solidity Interface

Author: thanks

- [Deconstructing a Smart Contract](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/deconstructing-a-solidity-contract-part-i-introduction-832efd2d7737/)
- [Layout of State Variables in Storage](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_storage.html)
- [Layout in Memory](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_memory.html)
- [Layout of Call Data](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/internals/layout_in_calldata.html)
- [Contract ABI Specification](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.10/abi-spec.html)
- [Precompiles in Solidity](https://medium.com/@rbkhmrcr/precompiles-solidity-e5d29bd428c4)
- [Customizing the EVM with Stateful Precompiles](https://medium.com/avalancheavax/customizing-the-evm-with-stateful-precompiles-f44a34f39efd)

Please install the following before getting started.

First install the latest version of Go. Follow the instructions [here](https://go.dev/doc/install). You can verify by running `go version`.

Set `$GOPATH` environment variable properly for Go to look for Go Workspaces. Please read [this](https://go.dev/doc/gopath_code) for details. You can verify by running `echo $GOPATH`.

> As a few things will be installed into `$GOPATH/bin`, please make sure that `$GOPATH/bin`is in your `$PATH`, otherwise, you may get error running the commands below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a few things will be installed into `$GOPATH/bin`, please make sure that `$GOPATH/bin` is in your `$PATH`, otherwise, you may get error running the commands below.
```

Author: thanks

Download the following prerequisites into your `$GOPATH`:

- Git Clone the [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm) repo
- Git Clone [Avalanchego](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego) repo
- Install [Avalanche Network Runner](https://docs.avax.network/subnets/network-runner)
- Install [solc](https://github.com/ethereum/solc-js#usage-on-the-command-line)
- Install [yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/lang/en/docs/install/#mac-stable)

> For easy copy paste, use the below commands.

Author: thanks

```
cd $GOPATH
mkdir -p src/github.com/ava-labs
cd src/github.com/ava-labs
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/subnet-evm.git
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/avalanchego.git
go install github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-network-runner@latest
npm install -g solc
npm install -g yarn
```

> ### Step 0: Generating the Precompile

Author: Added to earlier section

> For the tutorial, we will be working in a new branch in Subnet-EVM.

Author: thanks

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm
git checkout -b hello-world-stateful-precompile
```

We will start off in this directory `./contract-examples/contracts`.

```bash
cd contract-examples/contracts
```

First we must create the Solidity interface that we want our precompile to implement. This will be the HelloWorld Interface. It will have two simple functions, `sayHello()` and `setGreeting()`. These two functions will demonstrate the getting and setting respectively of a value stored in the precompile's state space.

> Create a new file called `IHelloWorld.sol` and copy and paste the below code.

Author: thanks

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

interface IHelloWorld {
  // sayHello returns the stored greeting string
  function sayHello() external view returns (string calldata result);

  // setGreeting  stores the greeting string
  function setGreeting(string calldata response) external;
}
```

Now we have an interface that our precompile can implement!
Let's create an [ABI](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.13/abi-spec.html#contract-abi-specification) of our Solidity inteface.

In the same `./contract-examples/contracts` directory, let's run

```
solcjs --abi IHelloWorld.sol && mv IHelloWorld_sol_IHelloWorld.abi IHelloWorld.abi
```

This generates the ABI code and moves it to `./contract-examples/contracts` as `IHelloWorld.abi`:

```json
[
  {
    "inputs": [],
    "name": "sayHello",
    "outputs": [
      { "internalType": "string", "name": "result", "type": "string" }
    ],
    "stateMutability": "nonpayable",
    "type": "function"
  },
  {
    "inputs": [
      { "internalType": "string", "name": "recipient", "type": "string" }
    ],
    "name": "setGreeting",
    "outputs": [],
    "stateMutability": "nonpayable",
    "type": "function"
  }
]
```

> Note: The abi must have named outputs in order to generate the precompile template.

Author: thanks

Now that we have an abi for the precompile gen tool to interact with, we can run the following command to generate our HelloWorld precompile!

Let's go back to the root of the Subnet-EVM repo and run the PrecompileGen script.

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm

go run ./cmd/precompilegen/main.go --abi ./contract-examples/contracts/IHelloWorld.abi --type HelloWorld --pkg precompile --out ./precompile/hello_world.go
```

> Wow! We just got a precompile template that's mostly complete located at `./precompile/hello_world.go`. Let's fill out the rest!

Author: thanks

> The precompile gives us commented instructions on the first 25 lines of the autogenerated file. Let's look at the 10 steps and follow them step by step.

Author: thanks

Typically, custom codes are required in only those areas.
4- Add your upgradable config in params/precompile_config.go
5- Add your precompile upgrade in params/config.go
6- Add your solidity interface and test contract to contract-examples/contracts
7- Write solidity tests for your precompile in contract-examples/test
8- Create your genesis with your precompile enabled in tests/e2e/genesis/
9- Create e2e test for your solidity test in tests/e2e/solidity/suites.go
10- Run your e2e precompile Solidity tests with 'E2E=true ./scripts/run.sh'
*/
```

### Step 1: Set Contract Address

In `./precompile/hello_world.go`, please search (`CTRL F`) `CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE` to find the first area where we can modify the precompile.

We can see our precompile address is set to some default value. We can cut the address from the var declaration block and remove it from the precompile.

![Singleton StatefulPrecompiledContract and signatures](./../../static/img/2022-09-01-22-46-00.png)

> We can paste it here in [`./precompile/params.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/precompile/params.go) and modify the default value to be the next user available stateful precompile address. For forks of subnet-evm, users should start at `0x0300000000000000000000000000000000000000` to ensure

Author: thanks

> that their own modifications do not conflict with stateful precompiles that may be added to subnet-evm in the future.

Author: thanks

		ContractNativeMinterAddress,
		TxAllowListAddress,
		FeeConfigManagerAddress,
		HelloWorldAddress,
		// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
		// YourPrecompileAddress
	}
```

Now when Subnet-EVM sees the `HelloWorldAddress` as input when executing [`CALL`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/core/vm/evm.go#L222), [`STATICCALL`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/core/vm/evm.go#L401), [`DELEGATECALL`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/core/vm/evm.go#L362), [`CALLCODE`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/core/vm/evm.go#L311), it can [run the precompile](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/core/vm/evm.go#L271-L272) if the precompile is enabled.

### Step 2: Set Gas Costs

In [`precompile/params.go`](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/HelloWorldOfficialTutorial/precompile/params.go) we have `writeGasCostPerSlot` and `readGasCostPerSlot`.

`writeGasCostPerSlot` is the cost of one write such as modifying a state storage slot.

`readGasCostPerSlot` is the cost of reading a state storage slot.

> This should be in your gas cost estimations based on how many times the precompile function does a read or a write. For example, if the precompile modifies the state slot of its precompile address twice then the gas cost for that function would be `40_000`.

Author: I will leave the `a` as it does not sound correct otherwise.

#### Step 3.1: Modify Equal()

Next we see this in `Equal()`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `Equal()` code.

```go
// Equal returns true if [s] is a [*HelloWorldConfig] and it has been configured identical to [c].
func (c *HelloWorldConfig) Equal(s StatefulPrecompileConfig) bool {
	// typecast before comparison
	other, ok := (s).(*HelloWorldConfig)
	if !ok {
		return false
	}
	// CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE
	// modify this boolean accordingly with your custom HelloWorldConfig, to check if [other] and the current [c] are equal
	// if HelloWorldConfig contains only UpgradeableConfig  you can skip modifying it.
	equals := c.UpgradeableConfig.Equal(&other.UpgradeableConfig)
	return equals
}
```

We can leave this function as is since we check `UpgradeableConfig` for equality which is the only field that `HelloWorldConfig` struct has.

```go
// HelloWorldConfig implements the StatefulPrecompileConfig
// interface while adding in the HelloWorld specific precompile address.
type HelloWorldConfig struct {
	UpgradeableConfig
}
```

> **Optional Note**

Author: Removed section

If our `HelloWorldConfig` wrapped another config in its struct to implement the `StatefulPrecompileConfig`

> like so,

Author: Removed section

```go
func (c *ChainConfig) GetActivePrecompiles(blockTimestamp *big.Int) PrecompileUpgrade {
	pu := PrecompileUpgrade{}
	if config := c.GetContractDeployerAllowListConfig(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
		pu.ContractDeployerAllowListConfig = config
	}
	if config := c.GetContractNativeMinterConfig(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
		pu.ContractNativeMinterConfig = config
	}
	if config := c.GetTxAllowListConfig(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
		pu.TxAllowListConfig = config
	}
	if config := c.GetFeeConfigManagerConfig(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
		pu.FeeManagerConfig = config
	}
  	if config := c.GetHelloWorldConfig(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
		pu.HelloWorldConfig = config
	}
	// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
	// if config := c.{YourPrecompile}Config(blockTimestamp); config != nil && !config.Disable {
	// 	pu.{YourPrecompile}Config = config
	// }

	return pu
}
```

> Done! All we had to do was follow the comments.

Author: I'm not going to add the `to` as it does not sound correct.

### Step 5: Add Precompile Upgrade

Let's add our precompile upgrade in `./params/config.go`. We can search (`CTRL F`) for `ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE`. This file is used to set up blockchain settings.

> Let's add the bool to check if our precompile is enabled. We are adding this to the `Rules` struct. `Rules` gives information about the blockchain, the version, and the precompile enablement status to functions that don't have this information. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default code.

Author: thanks

```go
  IsContractNativeMinterEnabled      bool
  IsTxAllowListEnabled               bool
  IsFeeConfigManagerEnabled          bool
  IsHelloWorldEnabled                bool
  // ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
  // Is{YourPrecompile}Enabled       bool
```

> We can add `IsHelloWorld()` which checks if we are equal or greater than the fork `blockTimestamp`. We use this to check out whether the precompile is enabled. We defined `GetHelloWorldConfig()` in the last step. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default code.

Author: thanks

```go
// IsHelloWorld returns whether [blockTimestamp] is either equal to the HelloWorld
// fork block timestamp or greater.

func (c *ChainConfig) IsHelloWorld(blockTimestamp *big.Int) bool {
	config := c.GetHelloWorldConfig(blockTimestamp)
	return config != nil && !config.Disable
}
```

We can now add it to the `AvalancheRules()` which creates and returns a new instance of `Rules`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default code.

```go
rules.IsContractNativeMinterEnabled = c.IsContractNativeMinter(blockTimestamp)
rules.IsTxAllowListEnabled = c.IsTxAllowList(blockTimestamp)
rules.IsFeeConfigManagerEnabled = c.IsFeeConfigManager(blockTimestamp)
rules.IsHelloWorldEnabled = c.IsHelloWorld(blockTimestamp)
// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
// rules.Is{YourPrecompile}Enabled = c.{IsYourPrecompile}(blockTimestamp)
```

> Done! All we had to do was follow the comments.

Author: I can slightly modify these but they provide a conclusion to the section.

### Step 6: Add Test Contract

> Let's add our test contract to `./contract-examples/contracts`. This smart contract lets us interact with our precompile! We cast the HelloWorld precompile address to the IHelloWorld interface. In doing so, `helloWorld` is now a contract of type `IHelloWorld` and when we call any functions on that contract, we will be redirected to the HelloWorld precompile address. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted into a new file called `ExampleHelloWorld.sol`.

Author: thanks, modified all but the `lets` as that needs to be plural when the subject is singular.

```sol
//SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

import "./IHelloWorld.sol";

// ExampleHelloWorld shows how the HelloWorld precompile can be used in a smart contract.
contract ExampleHelloWorld {
  address constant HELLO_WORLD_ADDRESS = 0x0300000000000000000000000000000000000000;
  IHelloWorld helloWorld = IHelloWorld(HELLO_WORLD_ADDRESS);

  function getHello() public view returns (string memory) {
    return helloWorld.sayHello();
  }

  function setGreeting(string calldata greeting) public {
    helloWorld.setGreeting(greeting);
  }
}
```

Please note that this contract is simply a wrapper and is calling the precompile functions.

### Step 7: Add Precompile Solidity Tests

> #### Step 7.1 Add Hardhat Test

Reviewer 2: Please add : after `Step x.y" to make them consistent with others.

Author: thanks

> We can now write our hardhat test in `./contract-examples/test`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted into a new file called `ExampleHelloWorld.ts`.

Author: thanks

// See the file LICENSE for licensing terms.

import { expect } from "chai"
import { ethers } from "hardhat"
import { Contract, ContractFactory } from "ethers"

describe("ExampleHelloWorld", function () {
  let helloWorldContract: Contract

  before(async function () {
    // Deploy Hello World Contract
    const ContractF: ContractFactory = await ethers.getContractFactory(
      "ExampleHelloWorld"
    )
    helloWorldContract = await ContractF.deploy()
    await helloWorldContract.deployed()
    const helloWorldContractAddress: string = helloWorldContract.address
    console.log(`Contract deployed to: ${helloWorldContractAddress}`)
  })

  it("should getHello properly", async function () {
    let result = await helloWorldContract.callStatic.getHello()
    expect(result).to.equal("Hello World!")
  })

  it("should setGreeting and getHello", async function () {
    const modifiedGreeting = "What's up"
    let tx = await helloWorldContract.setGreeting(modifiedGreeting)
    await tx.wait()

    expect(await helloWorldContract.callStatic.getHello()).to.be.equal(
      modifiedGreeting
    )
  })
})
```

Let's also make sure to run yarn in `./contract-examples`

```bash
yarn
```

> Let's see if our test contract passes! We need to get a local network up and running. A local network will start up multiple blockchains. Blockchains are nothing but instances of VMs. So when we get the local network up and running, we will get the X, C, and P chains up (primary network) as well as another blockchain that follows the rules defined by the Subnet-EVM.

Author: We included all links in the beginning of the tutorial under prerequisites. There is a clear note to download and install avalanche network runner.

// each of the possible stateful precompile types that can be activated
// as a network upgrade.
type PrecompileUpgrade struct {
	ContractDeployerAllowListConfig *precompile.ContractDeployerAllowListConfig `json:"contractDeployerAllowListConfig,omitempty"` // Config for the contract deployer allow list precompile
	ContractNativeMinterConfig      *precompile.ContractNativeMinterConfig      `json:"contractNativeMinterConfig,omitempty"`      // Config for the native minter precompile
	TxAllowListConfig               *precompile.TxAllowListConfig               `json:"txAllowListConfig,omitempty"`               // Config for the tx allow list precompile
	FeeManagerConfig                *precompile.FeeConfigManagerConfig          `json:"feeManagerConfig,omitempty"`                // Config for the fee manager precompile
	HelloWorldConfig                *precompile.HelloWorldConfig                `json:"helloWorldConfig,omitempty"`
	// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
	// {YourPrecompile}Config  *precompile.{YourPrecompile}Config `json:"{yourPrecompile}Config,omitempty"`
}
```

#### Step 7.3: Launch Local Network

Now we can get the network up and running.

> Start the server in a terminal in a new tab using avalanche-network-runner. Here's some more information on [avalanche-network-runner](https://docs.avax.network/subnets/network-runner), how to download it, and how to use it.

Author: sure

```bash
avalanche-network-runner server \
--log-level debug \
--port=":8080" \
--grpc-gateway-port=":8081"
```

The next steps are to build the Subnet-EVM binary with all the latest precompile changes and the latest AvalancheGo Binary.

In another terminal tab run this command in the root of the Subnet-EVM repo to get the latest local Subnet-EVM binary. This build script will place the binary in `AVALANCHEGO_PLUGIN_PATH` which we will define later.

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm
./scripts/build.sh
```

> Leave the Subnet-EVM repo. Go to the AvalancheGo repo in whatever directory you keep repos and run the command below to get the latest AvalancheGo binary. The following commands build and copy the binary to the `AVALANCHEGO_EXEC_PATH` which we will define later.

Author: thanks

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego
./scripts/build.sh
```

We can now set the following paths. `AVALANCHEGO_EXEC_PATH` points to the latest Avalanchego binary we have just built. `AVALANCHEGO_PLUGIN_PATH` points to the plugins path which should have the Subnet-EVM binary we have just built.

```bash
export AVALANCHEGO_EXEC_PATH="${GOPATH}/src/github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/build/avalanchego"
export AVALANCHEGO_PLUGIN_PATH="${GOPATH}/src/github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/build/plugins"
```

> Finally we can use avalanche-network-runner to spin up some nodes that run the latest version of Subnet-EVM.

Author: thanks

```bash
  avalanche-network-runner control start \
  --log-level debug \
  --endpoint="0.0.0.0:8080" \
  --number-of-nodes=5 \
  --avalanchego-path ${AVALANCHEGO_EXEC_PATH} \
  --plugin-dir ${AVALANCHEGO_PLUGIN_PATH} \
  --blockchain-specs '[{"vm_name": "subnetevm", "genesis": "/tmp/subnet-evm-genesis.json"}]'
```

We can look at the server terminal tab and see it booting up the local network.

> If the network startup is successful then you should see something like this.

Author: Thanks

```bash
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9650/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9652/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9654/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9656/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9658/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
```

#### Step 7.4: Modify Hardhat Config

Sweet! Now we have blockchain RPCs that can be used to talk to the network!

We also need to make sure `localRPC` points to the right value.

Let's copy `local_rpc.example.json` which is located in `./contract-examples`

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/contract-examples
cp local_rpc.example.json local_rpc.json
```

> Now in `local_rpc.json` we can modify the rpc url to the one we just created. We can also set `chainId` to match the one in the genesis file. It should look something like this.

Author: thanks

```json
{
  "rpc": "http://127.0.0.1:9656/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU/rpc",
  "chainId": 99999
}
```

#### Step 7.5: Run Tests

> Going to `./contract-examples`, we can finally run our tests by running the command below.

Author: thanks

		running := runner.IsRunnerUp()
		gomega.Expect(running).Should(gomega.BeTrue())
		runHardhatTests("./test/ExampleHelloWorld.ts")
		stopSubnet()
		running = runner.IsRunnerUp()
		gomega.Expect(running).Should(gomega.BeFalse())
	})

	// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
	/*
			ginkgo.It("your precompile", func() {
			err := startSubnet("./tests/e2e/genesis/{your_precompile}.json")
			gomega.Expect(err).Should(gomega.BeNil())
			running := runner.IsRunnerUp()
			gomega.Expect(running).Should(gomega.BeTrue())
			runHardhatTests("./test/Example{YourPrecompile}Test.ts")
			stopSubnet()
			running = runner.IsRunnerUp()
			gomega.Expect(running).Should(gomega.BeFalse())
		})
	*/
```

### Step 10: Run E2E Test

We also need to modify the genesis in `./scripts/run.sh` to enable our precompile.
Copy and paste the code snippet below and add it to to the genesis located in `./scripts/run.sh`.

```json
"helloWorldConfig": {
  "blockTimestamp": 0
},
```

Now we can run our script with some flags specified.

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm
SKIP_NETWORK_RUNNER_START=true SKIP_NETWORK_RUNNER_SHUTDOWN=true ENABLE_SOLIDITY_TESTS=true scripts/run.sh
```

### Conclusion

> We have now created a stateful precompile from scratch with the precompile generation tool. We hope you had fun and learned a little more about the Subnet-EVM. Now that you have created a simple stateful precompile, we urge you to create one of your own. If you have an idea for a stateful precompile that may be useful to the community, feel free to create a fork of the Subnet-EVM and create a pull request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have now created a stateful precompile from scratch with the precompile generation tool. We hope you had fun and learned a little more about the Subnet-EVM. Now that you have created a simple stateful precompile, we urge you to create one of your own. If you have an idea for a stateful precompile that may be useful to the community, feel free to create a pull request on the [Subnet-EVM project](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm).
```

Author: thanks

Author: I will still use `fork` as we don't want them to make a PR on our version of the project.

# Stateful Precompile Generation Tutorial

In this tutorial, we are going to walkthrough how we can generate a stateful precompile from scratch. Before we start, let's brush up on what a precompile is, what a stateful precompile is, and why this is extremely useful.

## Background

### Precompiled Contracts

Ethereum uses precompiles to efficiently implement cryptographic primitives within the EVM instead of re-implementing the same primitives in Solidity. The following precompiles are currently included: ecrecover, sha256, blake2f, ripemd-160, Bn256Add, Bn256Mul, Bn256Pairing, the identity function, and modular exponentiation.

> We can see these [precompile](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/core/vm/contracts.go#L81) mappings from address to function here in the Ethereum VM:

Author: instead of ethereum? this section is about ethereum and "normal" precompiles, so i wouldn't link subnet-evm.

> We can see these [precompile](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/core/vm/contracts.go#L81) mappings from address to function here in the Ethereum VM:

Reviewer 3: hmm I was thinking we can show the same code in subnet-evm, but might be confusing. 👍

```go
// PrecompiledContractsBerlin contains the default set of pre-compiled Ethereum
// contracts used in the Berlin release.
var PrecompiledContractsBerlin = map[common.Address]PrecompiledContract{
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{1}): &ecrecover{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{2}): &sha256hash{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{3}): &ripemd160hash{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{4}): &dataCopy{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{5}): &bigModExp{eip2565: true},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{6}): &bn256AddIstanbul{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{7}): &bn256ScalarMulIstanbul{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{8}): &bn256PairingIstanbul{},
	common.BytesToAddress([]byte{9}): &blake2F{},
}
```

These precompile addresses start from `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000001` and increment by 1.

> A [precompile](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/master/core/vm/contracts.go#L53-L56) follows this interface:

Author: Ok understood, will link to the official tutorial for all links

	h := sha256.Sum256(input)
	return h[:], nil
}
```

The CALL opcode (CALL, STATICCALL, DELEGATECALL, and CALLCODE) allows us to invoke this precompile.

The function signature of CALL in the EVM is as follows:

```go
 Call(
 	caller ContractRef,
 	addr common.Address,
 	input []byte,
 	gas uint64,
 	value *big.Int,
)(ret []byte, leftOverGas uint64, err error)
```

Precompiles are a shortcut to execute a function implemented by the EVM itself, rather than an actual contract. A precompile is associated with a fixed address defined in the EVM. There is no byte code associated with that address.

When a precompile is called, the EVM checks if the input address is a precompile address and if so it executes the precompile. Otherwise it loads the smart contract at the input address and runs it on the the EVM intrepreter with the specified input data.

### Stateful Precompiled Contracts

A stateful precompile builds on a precompile in that it adds state access. Stateful precompiles are not available in the default EVM, and are specific to Avalanche EVMs such as [Coreth](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth) and [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm).

> A stateful precompile follows this interface.

Author: Yes

We will place the interface in `./contract-examples/contracts`. You can copy and paste the below code into `./contract-examples/contracts/IHelloWorld.sol`.

```bash
cd contract-examples/contracts
```

```sol
// (c) 2022-2023, Ava Labs, Inc. All rights reserved.
// See the file LICENSE for licensing terms.

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

interface IHelloWorld {
 // sayHello returns the string located at [key]
  function sayHello() external returns (string calldata result);

// setGreeting sets the string located at [key]
  function setGreeting(string calldata response) external;
}
```

Now we have an interface that our precompile can implement!
Let's create an [abi](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.13/abi-spec.html#:~:text=Contract%20ABI%20Specification-,Basic%20Design,as%20described%20in%20this%20specification.) of our solidity code.

In the same `./contract-examples/contracts` directory, let's run

```
solcjs --abi IHelloWorld.sol
```

This spits out the abi code in `./contract-examples/contracts`!

> Rename this file to be called `IHelloWorld.abi`

Reviewer 2: Why do we have to rename, instead of keeping what is generated as `IHelloWorld_sol_IHelloWorld.abi`? Is it because you have to keep the tutorial working with your new changes?

Author: It's easier to read if this is called IHelloWorld.abi. This file name is not easy to follow. `IHelloWorld_sol_IHelloWorld.abi`

Author: I am doing a passthrough of the tutorial again today and will make the changes accordingly.

Reviewer 2: > It's easier to read if this is called IHelloWorld.abi. This file name is not easy to follow. `IHelloWorld_sol_IHelloWorld.abi`

I agree with the name not easy to follow. I disagree that we should change filename which is an extra step that user has to do.

Author: I am fixing to reduce steps.

When a precompile is called, the EVM checks if the input address is a precompile address and if so it executes the precompile. Otherwise it loads the smart contract at the input address and runs it on the the EVM intrepreter with the specified input data.

### Stateful Precompiled Contracts

A stateful precompile builds on a precompile in that it adds state access. Stateful precompiles are not available in the default EVM, and are specific to Avalanche EVMs such as [Coreth](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth) and [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm).

A stateful precompile follows this interface.

```go
// StatefulPrecompiledContract is the interface for executing a precompiled contract
type StatefulPrecompiledContract interface {
	// Run executes the precompiled contract.
	Run(accessibleState PrecompileAccessibleState,
	caller common.Address,
	addr  common.Address,
	input []byte,
	suppliedGas uint64,
	readOnly bool)
	(ret []byte, remainingGas uint64, err error)
}
```

> A stateful precompile injects state access through the `PrecompileAccessibleState` interface to provide access to the EVM state including the ability to modify balances, read/write storage, or even execute any Golang code we want.

Author: thanks

Set `$GOPATH` environment variable properly for Go to look for Go Workspaces. Please read [this](https://go.dev/doc/gopath_code) for details. You can verify by running `echo $GOPATH`.

As a few things will be installed into `$GOPATH/bin`, please make sure that `$GOPATH/bin`is in your `$PATH`, otherwise, you may get error running the commands below.

Download the following prerequisites into your `$GOPATH`:

- Git Clone the [Subnet-EVM](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm) repo
- Git Clone [Avalanchego](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego) repo
- Install [Avalanche Network Runner](https://docs.avax.network/subnets/network-runner)
- Install [solc](https://github.com/ethereum/solc-js#usage-on-the-command-line)
- Install [yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/lang/en/docs/install/#mac-stable)

For easy copy paste, use the below commands.

```
cd $GOPATH
mkdir -p src/github.com/ava-labs
cd src/github.com/ava-labs
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/subnet-evm.git
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/avalanchego.git
go install github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-network-runner@latest
npm install -g solc
npm install -g yarn
```

> ### Step 0: Generating the Precompile

Author: So we want to follow steps 1-10 as outlined by the precompile template so I matched those steps up. Step 0 seemed like the best name for the work that needs to be done before we generate the precompile

For the tutorial, we will be working in a new branch in Subnet-EVM.

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm
git checkout -b hello-world-stateful-precompile
```

We will start off in this directory `./contract-examples/contracts`.

```bash
cd contract-examples/contracts
```

First we must create the Solidity interface that we want our precompile to implement. This will be the HelloWorld Interface. It will have two simple functions, `sayHello()` and `setGreeting()`. These two functions will demonstrate the getting and setting respectively of a value stored in the precompile's state space.

Create a new file called `IHelloWorld.sol` and copy and paste the below code.

```sol
// (c) 2022-2023, Ava Labs, Inc. All rights reserved.
// See the file LICENSE for licensing terms.

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

interface IHelloWorld {

>   // sayHello returns the string located at [key]

Author: thanks

>   function sayHello() external returns (string calldata result);

Author: Yes this should have view. thanks

>   // setGreeting sets the string located at [key]

Author: done

  function setGreeting(string calldata response) external;
}
```

Now we have an interface that our precompile can implement!

> Let's create an [abi](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.13/abi-spec.html#:~:text=Contract%20ABI%20Specification-,Basic%20Design,as%20described%20in%20this%20specification.) of our solidity code.

Author: done thanks

2- Set gas costs here
3- It is recommended to only modify code in the highlighted areas marked with "CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE". Modifying code outside of these areas should be done with caution and with a deep understanding of how these changes may impact the EVM.
Typically, custom codes are required in only those areas.
4- Add your upgradable config in params/precompile_config.go
5- Add your precompile upgrade in params/config.go
6- Add your solidity interface and test contract to contract-examples/contracts
7- Write solidity tests for your precompile in contract-examples/test
8- Create your genesis with your precompile enabled in tests/e2e/genesis/
9- Create e2e test for your solidity test in tests/e2e/solidity/suites.go
10- Run your e2e precompile Solidity tests with 'E2E=true ./scripts/run.sh'
*/
```

### Step 1: Set Contract Address

In `./precompile/hello_world.go`, please search (`CTRL F`) `CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE` to find the first area where we can modify the precompile.

We can see our precompile address is set to some default value. We can cut the address from the var declaration block and remove it from the precompile.

> ![Singleton StatefulPrecompiledContract and signatures](./../../static/img/2022-09-01-22-46-00.png)

Reviewer 3: instead of PNG can we use full code. reference to github file or inline code here directly.

Author: I kept this because it shows where to start modifying the precompile and its surroundings.

`writeGasCostPerSlot` is the cost of one write such as modifying a state storage slot.

`readGasCostPerSlot` is the cost of reading a state storage slot.

This should be in your gas cost estimations based on how many times the precompile function does a read or a write. For example, if the precompile modifies the state slot of its precompile address twice then the gas cost for that function would be `40_000`.

```go
// Gas costs for stateful precompiles
const (
	writeGasCostPerSlot = 20_000
	readGasCostPerSlot  = 5_000
)
```

Now going back to `./precompile/hello_world.go`, we can modify our precompile function gas costs. Please search (`CTRL F`) `SET A GAS COST HERE` to locate the default gas cost code.

We will be getting and setting our greeting with `sayHello()` and `setGreeting()` in one slot respectively so we can define the gas costs as follows.

```go
	SayHelloGasCost    uint64 = readGasCostPerSlot
	SetGreetingGasGost uint64 = writeGasCostPerSlot
```

### Step 3: Add Custom Code

Search (`CTRL F`) throughout the file with `CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE` to find the areas in the precompile that we need to modify. We should start with the reference imports code block.

> ![Custom code starts here](./../../static/img/2022-09-01-22-48-26.png)

Reviewer 3: again if not very much required can we use a link to github or inline code?

Author: This shows the success state from running the script. No link possible. I would like to keep it in here unless there are strong opinions.

	equals := c.UpgradeableConfig.Equal(&other.UpgradeableConfig)
	return equals
}
```

We can leave this function as is since we check `UpgradeableConfig` for equality which is the only field that `HelloWorldConfig` struct has.

```go
// HelloWorldConfig implements the StatefulPrecompileConfig
// interface while adding in the HelloWorld specific precompile address.
type HelloWorldConfig struct {
	UpgradeableConfig
}
```

**Optional Note**

If our `HelloWorldConfig` wrapped another config in its struct to implement the `StatefulPrecompileConfig`
like so,

```go
// HelloWorldConfig implements the StatefulPrecompileConfig
// interface while adding in the IHelloWorld specific precompile address.

type HelloWorldConfig struct {
  UpgradeableConfig
  AllowListConfig
}
```

We would have to modify the `Equal()` function as follows:

```go
equalsUpgrade := c.UpgradeableConfig.Equal(&other.UpgradeableConfig)
equalsAllow := c.AllowListConfig.Equal(&other.AllowListConfig)

return equalsUpgrade && equalsAllow
```

#### Step 3.2 Modify Configure()

The next place we see the `CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE` is in `Configure()`.

> Let's set it up. `Configure()` configures the `state` with the initial configuration at whatever `blockTimestamp` the precompile is enabled. In the HelloWorld example, we want to set up a default key value mapping in the state where the key is `storageKey` and the value is `Hello World!`. The `StateDB` allows us to store a key value mapping of 32 byte hashes. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `Configure()` code.

Author: Sure

> Let's set it up. `Configure()` configures the `state` with the initial configuration at whatever `blockTimestamp` the precompile is enabled. In the HelloWorld example, we want to set up a default key value mapping in the state where the key is `storageKey` and the value is `Hello World!`. The `StateDB` allows us to store a key value mapping of 32 byte hashes. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `Configure()` code.

Reviewer 3: I think a brief description for them might be useful here since we don't actually use them in this `Configure`.

```go
// Configure configures [state] with the initial configuration.
func (c *HelloWorldConfig) Configure(_ ChainConfig, state StateDB, _ BlockContext) {
	// CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE
	// This will be called in the first block where HelloWorld stateful precompile is enabled.
	// 1) If BlockTimestamp is nil, this will not be called
	// 2) If BlockTimestamp is 0, this will be called while setting up the genesis block
	// 3) If BlockTimestamp is 1000, this will be called while processing the first block
	// whose timestamp is >= 1000
	//
	// Set the initial value under [common.BytesToHash([]byte("storageKey")] to "Hello World!"

> 	res := common.LeftPadBytes([]byte("Hello World!"), common.HashLength)

Author: Just want to keep the number of places that reader is copying and pasting low, so not add constants

	state.SetState(HelloWorldAddress, common.BytesToHash([]byte("storageKey")), common.BytesToHash(res))
}
```

#### Step 3.3 Modify Verify()

We also see a `Verify()` function. `Verify()` is called on startup and an error is treated as fatal. We can leave this as is right now because there is no invalid configuration for the `HelloWorldConfig`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `Verify()` code.

```go
// Verify tries to verify HelloWorldConfig and returns an error accordingly.
func (c *HelloWorldConfig) Verify() error {
	return nil
}

> ```

Author: We keeping the order from top to bottom for the reader.

#### Step 3.4 Modify sayHello()

Next place to modify is in our `sayHello()` function. In a previous step we created the `IHelloWorld.sol` interface with two functions `sayHello()` and `setGreeting()`. We finally get to implement them here. If any contract calls these functions from the interface, the below function gets executed. This function is a simple getter function. In `Configure()` we set up a mapping with the key as `storageKey` and the value as `Hello World!` In this function, we will be returning whatever value is at `storageKey`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `sayHello` code.

```go
func sayHello(accessibleState PrecompileAccessibleState, caller common.Address, addr common.Address, input []byte, suppliedGas uint64, readOnly bool) (ret []byte, remainingGas uint64, err error) {
	if remainingGas, err = deductGas(suppliedGas, SayHelloGasCost); err != nil {
		return nil, 0, err
	}
	// No input provided for this function
	// CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE
	// Get the current state
	currentState := accessibleState.GetStateDB()
	// Get the value set at recipient

> 	value := currentState.GetState(HelloWorldAddress, common.BytesToHash([]byte("storageKey")))

Author: I didn't want to use constants here because I want people to have to copy and paste the least amount of code. If I define a constant then we have to copy and paste it at the top of the file and then this code as well.

}
```

#### Step 3.5 Modify setGreeting()

We can also modify our `setGreeting()` function. This is a simple setter function. It takes in `input` and we will set that as the value in the state mapping with the key as `storageKey`. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default `sayGreeting()` code.

```go
func setGreeting(accessibleState PrecompileAccessibleState, caller common.Address, addr common.Address, input []byte, suppliedGas uint64, readOnly bool) (ret []byte, remainingGas uint64, err error) {
	if remainingGas, err = deductGas(suppliedGas, SetGreetingGasCost); err != nil {
		return nil, 0, err
	}
	if readOnly {
		return nil, remainingGas, vmerrs.ErrWriteProtection
	}
	// Attempts to unpack [input] into the arguments to the SetGreetingInput.
	// Assumes that [input] does not include selector
	// You can use unpacked [inputStruct] variable in your code
    inputStr, err := UnpackSetGreetingInput(input)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, remainingGas, err
	}

  	// CUSTOM CODE STARTS HERE
  	// Check if the input string is longer than 32 bytes
    if len(inputStr) > 32 {
      return nil, 0, errors.New("input string is longer than 32 bytes")

>     }

Author: thanks

  	// setGreeting is the execution function
  	// "SetGreeting(name string)" and sets the storageKey
  	// in the string returned by hello world
  	res := common.LeftPadBytes([]byte(inputStr), common.HashLength)

> 	accessibleState.GetStateDB().SetState(HelloWorldAddress, common.BytesToHash([]byte("storageKey")), common.BytesToHash(res))

Author: I didn't want to use constants here because I want people to have to copy and paste the least amount of code. If I define a constant then we have to copy and paste it at the top of the file and then this code as well.

	// This function does not return an output, leave this one as is
	packedOutput := []byte{}

	// Return the packed output and the remaining gas
	return packedOutput, remainingGas, nil
}
```

### Step 4: Add Upgradable Config

> Let's now modify `./params/precompile_config.go`. We can search (`CTRL F`) for `ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE`.

Author: done

```go
const (
	contractDeployerAllowListKey precompileKey = iota + 1
	contractNativeMinterKey
	txAllowListKey
	feeManagerKey
	helloWorldKey
	// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
	// {yourPrecompile}Key
)
```

We should also add our precompile key to our `precompileKeys` slice. We use this slice to iterate over the keys and activate the precompiles. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default code.

```go
// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
var precompileKeys = []precompileKey{contractDeployerAllowListKey, contractNativeMinterKey, txAllowListKey, feeManagerKey, helloWorldKey /* {yourPrecompile}Key */}
```

We should add our precompile to the `PrecompileUpgrade` struct. The `PrecompileUpgrade` is a helper struct embedded in `UpgradeConfig` and represents each of the possible stateful precompile types that can be activated or deactivated as part of a network upgrade. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to overwrite the default code.

```go

> type PrecompileUpgrade struct {

Author: done

```go
// PrecompileUpgrade is a helper struct embedded in UpgradeConfig, representing
// each of the possible stateful precompile types that can be activated
// as a network upgrade.
type PrecompileUpgrade struct {
	ContractDeployerAllowListConfig *precompile.ContractDeployerAllowListConfig `json:"contractDeployerAllowListConfig,omitempty"` // Config for the contract deployer allow list precompile
	ContractNativeMinterConfig      *precompile.ContractNativeMinterConfig      `json:"contractNativeMinterConfig,omitempty"`      // Config for the native minter precompile
	TxAllowListConfig               *precompile.TxAllowListConfig               `json:"txAllowListConfig,omitempty"`               // Config for the tx allow list precompile
	FeeManagerConfig                *precompile.FeeConfigManagerConfig          `json:"feeManagerConfig,omitempty"`                // Config for the fee manager precompile
	HelloWorldConfig                *precompile.HelloWorldConfig                `json:"helloWorldConfig,omitempty"`
	// ADD YOUR PRECOMPILE HERE
	// {YourPrecompile}Config  *precompile.{YourPrecompile}Config `json:"{yourPrecompile}Config,omitempty"`
}
```

> #### Step 7.3 Launch Local Network

Author: Yeah this step should be easier.

Now we can get the network up and running.

Start the server in a terminal in a new tab using avalanche-network-runner. Here's some more information on [avalanche-network-runner](https://docs.avax.network/subnets/network-runner), how to download it, and how to use it.

```bash
avalanche-network-runner server \
--log-level debug \
--port=":8080" \
--grpc-gateway-port=":8081"
```

> The next steps are to build the Subnet-EVM binary with all the latest precompile changes and the lastest AvalancheGo Binary.

Author: Thanks good catch

```

We can look at the server terminal tab and see it booting up the local network.
If the network startup is successful then you should see something like this.

```bash
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9650/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9652/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9654/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9656/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
[blockchain RPC for "srEXiWaHuhNyGwPUi444Tu47ZEDwxTWrbQiuD7FmgSAQ6X7Dy"] "http://127.0.0.1:9658/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU"
```

#### Step 7.4 Modify Hardhat Config

Sweet! Now we have blockchain RPCs that can be used to talk to the network!
We now need to modify the hardhat config located in `./contract-examples/hardhat.config.ts`

We need to modify the `local` network.

> Let's change `chainId`, `gas`, and `gasPrice`. Make sure the `chainId` matches the one in the genesis file. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to override the default config.

Author: Yes the new changes make it so that we don't need to modify it!

> Let's change `chainId`, `gas`, and `gasPrice`. Make sure the `chainId` matches the one in the genesis file. The below code snippet can be copied and pasted to override the default config.

Author: Thanks

> ```json

Author: thanks

networks: {
    local: {
      //"http://{ip}:{port}/ext/bc/{chainID}/rpc
      // modify this in the local_rpc.json
      url: localRPC,
      chainId: 99999,
      accounts: [
        "0x56289e99c94b6912bfc12adc093c9b51124f0dc54ac7a766b2bc5ccf558d8027",
        "0x7b4198529994b0dc604278c99d153cfd069d594753d471171a1d102a10438e07",
        "0x15614556be13730e9e8d6eacc1603143e7b96987429df8726384c2ec4502ef6e",
        "0x31b571bf6894a248831ff937bb49f7754509fe93bbd2517c9c73c4144c0e97dc",
        "0x6934bef917e01692b789da754a0eae31a8536eb465e7bff752ea291dad88c675",
        "0xe700bdbdbc279b808b1ec45f8c2370e4616d3a02c336e68d85d4668e08f53cff",
        "0xbbc2865b76ba28016bc2255c7504d000e046ae01934b04c694592a6276988630",
        "0xcdbfd34f687ced8c6968854f8a99ae47712c4f4183b78dcc4a903d1bfe8cbf60",
        "0x86f78c5416151fe3546dece84fda4b4b1e36089f2dbc48496faf3a950f16157c",
        "0x750839e9dbbd2a0910efe40f50b2f3b2f2f59f5580bb4b83bd8c1201cf9a010a"
      ],
      gasPrice: 25000000000,

>       gas: 10000000,

Author: yup thanks for pointing that out :)

    }
  }
```

We also need to make sure `localRPC` points to the right value.

Let's copy `local_rpc.example.json` which is located in `./contract-examples`

```bash
cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/contract-examples
cp local_rpc.example.json local_rpc.json
```

Now in `local_rpc.json` we can modify the rpc url to the one we just created. It should look something like this.

```json
{
  "rpc": "http://127.0.0.1:9656/ext/bc/2jDWMrF9yKK8gZfJaaaSfACKeMasiNgHmuZip5mWxUfhKaYoEU/rpc"
}
```

#### Step 7.5 Run Tests

Going to `./contract-examples`, we can finally run our tests by running the command below.

```bash
npx hardhat test --network local
```

Great they passed! All the functions implemented in the precompile work as expected!

> If your tests failed, please retrace your steps. Most likely the error is that the precompile was not enabled and some code is missing. Please also use the [official tutorial](https://github.com/ava-labs/hello-world-official-precompile-tutorial/pull/1) to double check your work as well.

Reviewer 2: As I mentioned early, we should mention this PR in the early part of this tutorial, rather than waiting until this step.
